# Flocking: Needs a Title

_Flocking_ (flockingjs.org) is a web-based framework for audio synthesis, composition, and performance on the web. By embracing the ubiquity and flexibility of web-based technologies, Flocking attempts to support a broad community of digital instrument designers and composers. Written entirely in JavaScript, Flocking applications can run on a variety of platforms including traditional desktop operating systems such as Mac OS X, Windows, and Linux, as well as mobile platforms such as iOS and Android. Flocking has also been used by the author to create sound installations and compositions on embedded platforms such as the popular Raspberry Pi computer using Node.js. Several recent pieces by the author, made with Flocking, will be demonstrated.

This paper will position Flocking within the emerging context of web audio tools and techniques, providing an overview of the challenges and potential of making music on the web. Unlike traditional music frameworks, Flocking is based on a declarative approach that represents instruments and compositions as data rather than code. In Flocking, synths and scores alike are composed from collections of unit generators that are specified as trees of JSON objects. JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is a popular format for exchanging data across programs and web services, and is very easy to generate and parse using nearly any programming language. Flocking's declarative approach represents a form of _metaprogramming_ that can support the creation of programs that are able to understand and transform the structure and content of an instrument or musical algorithm. For example, the author (along with students funded by the Google Summer of Code program) is working on graphical tools for creating and editing instruments built with Flocking. The goal is to enable non-expert developers to collaborate directly with musicians who prefer traditional text-based computer music programming.

Another benefit of Flocking is that it provides a very flexible means by which instruments and compositions can be reused and adapted. Flocking employs a simple but powerful object merging algorithm that allows a musician to "overlay" their own customizations and changes onto an existing instrument without having to directly change its internals. This helps to promote the sharing of modules across a body of compositions and amongst communities of digital instrument designers.

Recently, support has been added for OSC-based hardware controllers, providing a way for musicians to bind physical input controllers to their Flocking-based instruments. An example of a Teensy-based OSC controller will be demonstrated, illustrating Flocking's flexible tools for binding and transforming control input to suit different instruments and performance scenarios.

Flocking is still under active development and currently provides a fairly small collection of built-in unit generators and instruments. Nonetheless, it has proved to be highly germane to the author's own musical practice, supporting a conversation between the composition process and the emerging technical capabilities of the system. It has promoted a compositional approach that embraces constraints and an aesthetic of making the most out of small, composable building blocks. In contrast to many other web audio frameworks, which attempt to support many audio use cases, such as gaming and commercial apps, equally within one tool, Flocking intentionally prioritizes the importance of artistic and "unpopular" music-making. As Flocking evolves, community adoption is growing and it increasingly represents a viable musical tool for composers and sound artists working in a variety of media and styles.
